# WiFi_Fingerprinting_Indoor_Navigation_MultiLabel_Classifier_System
Wifi based Indoor Localization system utilizing Wi-Fi Fingerprinting Technique

Introduction: Indoor localization refers to determining the location of an individual or an object inside a building or any indoor environment. With the increasing demand for location-based services, indoor localization has gained significant attention in recent years [1]. WiFi fingerprinting is one of the widely used techniques for indoor localization. Generally, It involves measuring the signal strength of Wi-Fi access points (APs) to determine the location of a device.

Issues of indoor localization: Indoor positioning focuses on predicting the user’s location in constrained environments (e.g. office buildings, hospitals, train stations, shopping malls, etc.). Such an environment often contains multiple rooms, corridors and floors, and is crowded with furniture, walls and people. Therefore, the electromagnetic signals are usually blocked, attenuated and reflected when travelling in an indoor environment [2].

Steps of wifi fingerprinting: The use of WiFi fingerprinting has become a popular approach also for indoor localization due to its wide availability, low cost, and high accuracy [3]. The process of Wi-Fi fingerprinting involves the following steps: 
Establish a database containing WiFi signals collected at every reference point in the targeted indoor environment. 
Each location in the targeted area has its own distinguishing WiFi fingerprint i.e., distinct WiFi signal pattern because the propagation of the WiFi signal is affected by the complex indoor environment.
Positioning systems take advantage of this feature of the WiFi fingerprint to accurately perform location estimation of the user.
Match the real-time WiFi signals received by the user with those in the database, so that positioning estimation of the user’s current location could be generated based on their relevance.

Deep learning in Wifi fingerprinting: Deep learning is utilised in wifi fingerprinting because of the following features it offers over other machine learning approaches:
It provides valid representations of multimodal WiFi fingerprinting data.
It can deal with a massive amount of high-dimensional data which is the usual case-scenario of wifi localization.
It is capable of extracting hierarchical information from discrete input data.
It provides configurability of modifying as a regressor or classifier to perform distinguishing positioning tasks.

Wi-fi Fingerprinting based localization
Fingerprinting technique consists of two phases: calibration and positioning. In the calibration phase, an extensive radio map is built consisting of RSSI values from multiple Wi-Fi Access Points (APs) at different known locations. This calibration data is used to train the localization algorithm. In the positioning phase, when a user reports the RSSI measurements for the multiple APs, the fit algorithm predicts the user position.

Dataset Description
For building prediction algorithms and performing analysis in the initial stages of this project a publicly available dataset UJIIndoorLoc is utilised [24]. UJIIndoorLoc is a multi-building and multi-floor WLAN localization database. The UJIIndoorLoc database covers three buildings of Universitat Jaume I, Madrid Spain with 4 or more floors and almost 110000 m2 (Fig 2a.). The full raw information is collected by more than 20 users and by means of 25 devices. The dataset consists of 19937 calibration/training/reference records and 1111 positioning/validation/test records. 
The 529 attributes contain the WiFi fingerprint, the coordinates where it was taken, and other useful information. Each Wi-Fi fingerprint record consists of user ID, timestamp, received signal strength intensity (RSSI) of 520 Wireless Access Points (WAPs) and location information including latitude, longitude, floor etc. Each WiFi fingerprint thus can be characterised by the detected WAPs and the corresponding RSSI. The intensity values are represented as negative integer values ranging from -104dBm (extremely poor signal) to 0dbM. The positive value 100 is used to denote when a WAP was not detected. During the database creation 520 different WAPs were detected, thus the WiFi fingerprint is composed of 520 intensity values. 

Classification Approach
The work is started with developing a classification model for building id and floor id simultaneous prediction. Classification is a supervised machine learning method where the model tries to predict the correct label of a given input data. There are two types of learners in classification: eager and lazy learners. Eager learners are machine learning algorithms that first build a model from the training dataset before making any prediction on future datasets. They spend more time during the training process and require less time to make predictions. Lazy learners or instance-based learners, on the other hand, do not create any model immediately from the training data. They  memorise the training data, and each time there is a need to make a prediction, they search for the nearest neighbour from the whole training data, which makes them  slow during prediction. 
Multi-Label K-Nearest Neighbors (ML-KNN) approach, which is a type of instance-based learner, is used to approach the classification problem. The model simultaneously predicts Building ID and Floor ID which reduces the compute power, memory and processing time. The classical and adaptive approaches are implemented. The classical approach focuses on problem transformation which transforms the multi-label classification problem into multiple single-label classification problems. Whereas the algorithmic adaptive approach focuses on directly adapting the algorithm to the multi-label classification problem
